Safe Sleep 

Internet Explorer Alert

It appears you are using Internet Explorer as your web browser. Please note, Internet Explorer is no longer up-to-date and can cause problems in how this website functions
This site functions best using the latest versions of any of the following browsers: Edge, Firefox, Chrome, Opera, or Safari . 
You can find the latest versions of these browsers at https://browsehappy.com 

Advertisement Disclaimer 

We&rsquo;ve assembled a collection of tools and resources to help pediatricians and healthcare professionals provide education and guidance to parents and caregivers on infant safe sleep.

Watch these new videos that demonstrate how to respond to families and caregivers in a culturally sensitive, informative, and non-judgmental way to reinforce the critical message of practicing safe infant sleep. 

SUID and Safe Sleep Overview

Sudden Unexpected Infant Death (SUID), which includes Sudden Infant Death Syndrome (SIDS), is the leading cause of injury death in infancy. Sleep is a big challenge for families with babies, but following safe sleep recommendations can prevent many SUID fatalities. Help the families in your practice learn how their babies can sleep safely so parents can sleep soundly.

The rate of sleep-related infant death declined significantly in the 1990s after the AAP and others recommended that babies be placed on their backs to sleep, but rates have since plateaued, and SIDS remains the leading cause of postneonatal mortality. Black and Native American/Alaska Native infants die at rates more than double that of white babies. Pediatricians should support all families in implementing recommendations that reduce the risk of sleep-related infant death: 

Place infants on their backs for sleep in their own sleep space with no other people. 

Use a crib, bassinet or portable play yard with a firm, flat mattress and a fitted sheet. Avoid sleep on a couch or armchair or in a seating device, like a swing or car safety seat (except while riding in the car). 

Keep loose blankets, pillows, stuffed toys, bumpers and other soft items out of the sleep space. 

Breastfeed if possible and avoid smoking.

AAP Safe Sleep Recommendations

The AAP provides evidence-based recommendations to prevent infant sleep deaths in the policy statement &ldquo;Sleep-Related Infant Deaths: Updated 2022 Recommendations for Reducing Infant Deaths in the Sleep Environment.&rdquo; The evidence supporting those recommendations is outlined in an accompanying technical report. 

View Policy Statement 

View Technical Report 

Sudden Unexpected Infant Death (SUID) Prevention Program 

The Sudden Unexpected Infant Death (SUID) Prevention Program is an effort by the American Academy of Pediatrics to provide evidence-based counseling and education to infant caregivers and families, and to guide system improvements to reduce overall rates of SUID and racial and ethnic disparities in SUID.

See More 

Professional Tools & Resources

Provider and Patient Conversations for Safe Sleep

View videos that demonstrate how pediatricians can respond to families and caregivers in a culturally sensitive, informative, and non-judgmental way to reinforce the critical message of practicing safe infant sleep. 

Safe Sleep Campaign 

Find materials including posters, infographics, videos and social media messages to download, share and post.

Safe to Sleep 

View educational materials for health care providers, parents and caregivers to help prevent sleep-related causes of infant death.

Safe Infant Sleep Image Library

Access copyright-free images that can be used for safe sleep communications in print or online.

Bright Futures Tool and Resource Kit – Infancy Tools 

Find a compilation of forms and materials on preventive health supervision and health screening for infants.

National Center for Fatality Review and Prevention 

Equips communities to improve safety and prevent future fatalities through multidisciplinary, in-depth case review. Learn how to participate and how to access child death review data to strengthen prevention in your community.

PediaLink Course for Safe Sleep 

Learn more about the updated AAP guidelines for Safe Infant Sleep and the importance of developing Safe Infant Sleep policies in early education settings. 

EQIPP: Safe Sleep

This course builds upon the pilot Safe Sleep and Naps Using Guidelines to Lead and Educate
(SSNUGLE), a live QI course during which the participants demonstrated impressive
gains in screening and counseling parents and caregivers about sleep position, location,
and environment.

Resources for Families 

HealthyChildren.org Safe Sleep Articles

View HealthyChildren.org articles that help parents learn what they need to know about safe sleep. 

Cribs for Kids

Discover this organization that provides safe sleep equipment to families in need.

Charlie’s Kids Foundation

Learn more about this foundation that provides organizations with a board book about safe sleep, Sleep Baby Safe and Snug, to give to families.

Saferproducts.gov

View this website that allows families to check for safety complaints about a product before buying. Healthcare providers, families and others can also report product-related injuries to the CPSC.

Last Updated

07/07/2025

Source

American Academy of Pediatrics

Feedback Form