Essentials for Parenting Toddlers and Preschoolers | Essentials for Parenting Toddlers | CDC 

Skip directly to site content 

Skip directly to search 

An official website of the United States government 

Here's how you know

Official websites use .gov 

A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.

Secure .gov websites use HTTPS 

A lock ( ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.

July 26, 2024 

Essentials for Parenting Toddlers and Preschoolers

Key points

Essentials for Parenting Toddlers and Preschoolers is a free, online resource for parents of 2- to 4-year-old children. 

Access resources based on decades of research and parenting experiences to help build positive relationships with your children, encourage good behavior, and address common parenting challenges. 

Overview

Essentials for Parenting Toddlers and Preschoolers is a free, online resource developed by CDC. Designed for parents of 2-to 4-year-olds, Essentials for Parenting addresses common parenting challenges like tantrums and whining. The purpose of the resource is to provide as much information as possible on things you can do to build a positive, healthy relationship. Skills focus on encouraging good behavior and decreasing misbehavior using proven strategies like positive communication, structure and rules, clear directions, and consistent discipline and consequences.

Essentials for Parenting includes:

Articles with a variety of skills, tips, and techniques. 

Videos featuring parents, children, and parenting experts who demonstrate and discuss skills. 

Free print resources like chore charts and daily schedules. 

Essentials for Parenting is based on:

Decades of research and practical parenting experience suggesting that certain skills are useful in building a positive relationship and in handling children's challenging behaviors. 

Research conducted by CDC about the types of questions parents have, where and how they look for information, and how they want to receive information. 

Topics covered

There are many things you can do to help build a safe, stable, and nurturing relationship with your child. Explore the topics below and discover tips for handling some common parenting challenges. Become a more confident parent while helping your child grow. 

Tips for Communicating With Your Child 

Communicate effectively with your child using praise, play, and active listening.

Aug. 8, 2024 

Tips for Creating Structure and Rules 

Learn how routines and rules help your child know what to expect and can make the days smoother.

Aug. 8, 2024 

Tips for Giving Directions 

Tips to help parents learn how to give better directions to their child.

Aug. 8, 2024 

Tips for Using Discipline and Consequences 

Learn how to discipline and set consequences for toddlers with practical guidelines and videos.

Aug. 8, 2024 

Tips for Using Time-Out 

Learn the benefits of using time-out as a healthy parenting strategy.

Aug. 8, 2024 

All families are not alike

We know that every child and every parent is unique. You face many different situations and challenges every day. We don&rsquo;t take a one-size-fits-all approach or think of this as a set of strict parenting rules that must be followed. We hope to give you new ideas for parenting so you can make the best decisions about what can work with your child and family.

Resources

Resources from the CDC, federal websites, and additional online sources offering information, advice, training, education and support for parents are available on the Resources webpage.

July 26, 2024 

Sources 

Print 

Share 

Facebook 

LinkedIn 

Twitter 

Syndicate 

Content Source:

National Center for Injury Prevention and Control 

Essentials for Parenting Toddlers 

Essentials for Parenting Toddlers and Preschoolers is a free resource for parents of 2 to 4-year-olds, providing information to build positive relationships.

View All 

About 

Communicating With Your Child 

Creating Structure and Rules 

Giving Directions 

Using Discipline and Consequences 

Using Time-Out 

Resources 

View All 

Sign up for Email Updates