Supporting Your Partner During Pregnancy | Tommy's 

Skip to main content

Getting involved in the pregnancy - for dads, partners and non-birthing parents

Reviewed for clinical accuracy by Kate Marsh , Tommy’s Co-Midwifery Manager and Policy Officer, Health Visitor Lead – Genomics, NHS North Thames Genomic Medicine Service.
Written by Lorna Marsh , Freelance Writer and Editor, Tommy’s. 
Trusted health information certified under the PIF TICK . Last reviewed January 2026. 

On this page 

Getting involved in the pregnancy: the first 3 months 

Pregnancy dates 

Pregnancy symptoms in the first trimester 

What you can do 

Getting involved in the pregnancy: months 4 to 6 

Pregnancy symptoms in the second trimester 

Bonding with your baby 

Supporting your partner 

Getting involved in the pregnancy: the last 3 months before birth 

Pregnancy symptoms in the third trimester 

Supporting your partner 

Here’s more information about what’s happening at each stage of your partner’s pregnancy and how you can support them.

Getting involved in the pregnancy: the first 3 months

In the first 3 months, your partner is likely to start having pregnancy symptoms. Here you can find out what to expect and how you can support them to have a healthy pregnancy. 

Pregnancy dates

Pregnancy is dated from the first day of your partner’s last period. This date is usually about 2 weeks before they actually got pregnant. 

The first sign of pregnancy is usually a missed period. So you and your partner may not be aware of the pregnancy for the first few weeks. Some women and birthing people may have very light vaginal bleeding (spotting) when the fertilised egg embeds into the wall of the womb. 

Pregnancy is divided into 3 trimesters. The first 3 months are called the first trimester. 

Pregnancy symptoms in the first trimester

Changes in hormone levels during pregnancy can cause physical and emotional changes in your partner. But every pregnancy is different. Your partner may have a lot of symptoms, or they may not have many at all. 

A common symptom of pregnancy is nausea and vomiting , which can start at about 4-7 weeks. This is sometimes called morning sickness but it can happen at any time of the day or night. 

You could help your partner work out what triggers their sickness – for example, a particular food, smell or time of day. Eating small, frequent meals and drinking plenty of water can help. There’s also some evidence that foods and drinks containing ginger can help but they should check with a pharmacist before taking any supplements. 

If the sickness is making daily life difficult or doesn’t get better, encourage your partner to speak to their GP. They can prescribe anti-sickness medications (antiemetics).

Very severe pregnancy sickness is called hyperemesis gravidarum. Read more about hyperemesis gravidarum here.

Other symptoms during the first 3 months can include: 

feeling tired – help them to eat well and get plenty of rest. Gentle exercise can help too

getting upset easily – encourage them to share their feelings with you and ask for help if they need it

sore breasts

needing to pass urine more often than usual – it’s still important to drink plenty of fluids so that their urine is a pale, clear colour

changes in taste and smell.

There are lots of things you can do to get involved in the pregnancy and support your partner in the first few weeks.

Work out the due date together.

Check that you both have a healthy lifestyle – this is important for you too.

Encourage your partner to take vitamin D and folic acid supplements .

Encourage your partner to speak to their midwife or GP if they’re worried about any pregnancy symptoms – they can also use our pregnancy symptom checker .

Sign up to our pregnancy emails .

Find out what financial help and time off work you can both get.

Find antenatal classes in your area . 

Read our week-by-week guide to the first 3 months of pregnancy . 

Months 4 to 6 are called the second trimester. The pregnancy might start to feel more real now that your partner’s baby bump is becoming more noticeable. Your baby will start to hear and move, giving you the chance to bond with them. 

The sickness of the first trimester should start to pass now. But the second trimester can bring its own set of symptoms. 

A change in sex drive. Your partner’s sex drive may go up and down. Having sex is safe unless a doctor or midwife has advised your partner not to.

Backache. Gentle exercise can help. Help them avoid lifting anything heavy and give them a cushion to support their back when they’re sitting down.

Headaches. These are common but if they don’t go away your partner should see their GP or midwife. It’s safe to take paracetamol for a short time but they should not take codeine or ibuprofen unless a doctor has told them to.

Tiredness. Encourage them to rest when they can.

Pain in the hips or pelvis. Sleeping with a pillow between their knees may help.

Constipation. Hormone changes can mean your partner finds it difficult and uncomfortable to poo. Eating lots of fibre, drinking plenty of water and gentle exercise can help.

Cramp. This is usually in the legs or feet. Firmly rubbing the muscle or pulling the toes up towards the ankle may help to ease cramp.

Feeling faint. Get your partner to sit down or lie on their side until they feel better.

Swelling in the hands and feet. Make sure your partner doesn’t stand up for long periods and help them put their feet up when they’re resting.

Your partner may not get all of these symptoms but contact the midwife if either of you are worried about any of them. You can also use our pregnancy symptom checker .

You might also find it helpful to read our information on making decisions in pregnancy, and to share it with your partner. 

You can start to bond with your baby now that they’re starting to hear and move around in the womb. Talking and singing to them will mean they get to know your voice. Towards the end of this trimester, you may be able to feel your baby moving if you put a hand on your partner’s bump. 

Read our week-by-week guide to the second trimester . 

You can support your partner to have a healthy pregnancy by:

taking on any physical tasks that they find uncomfortable, such as lifting heavy items

helping them to sit with their feet raised if they have swollen feet

support them to contact the maternity unit straight away if baby is moving less, movements feel weaker or baby has stopped moving.

encouraging them to see their GP or midwife if they’re worried about any symptoms or the baby.

Getting involved in the pregnancy: the last 3 months before birth

The last 3 months of pregnancy are called the third trimester. It won’t be long until you get to meet your baby. 

Pregnancy symptoms in the third trimester

During this last trimester, your partner’s bump will get bigger and the baby will continue to move around a lot. Mums and birthing parents at this stage may: 

get breathless easily

find it difficult to sleep ‒ it ’ s safest for them to sleep on their side 

feel more uncomfortable

get Braxton Hicks , which feel like a tightening in the stomach area ‒ they ’ re perfectly normal but not everyone gets them. 

Contact the maternity unit if you or your partner are worried about any pregnancy symptoms. You can also use our pregnancy symptom checker .

Supporting your partner

You can help your partner feel more comfortable by helping them find time to rest and taking on any physical work or heavy lifting. You may also want to:

Help them pack their hospital bag .

Continue to support them to contact the maternity unit straight away if baby is moving less, movements feel weaker or baby has stopped moving.

Talk to them about any fears or worries they have about giving birth

Read more about speaking up for your partner and supporting their decisions before and during labour 

Help them to make a birth plan – this can help them feel more in control

Think about joining a local antenatal class together

Plan your route to the maternity unit if they are planning on giving birth there

Get your baby’s car seat ready 

Buy the essential items for the early days after the birth together . 

Read our week-by-week guide to the third trimester . 

Find out more about pregnancy for dads and partners

Sources

NHS (nd). You and your pregnancy at 1 to 3 weeks . Available at https://www.nhs.uk/pregnancy/week-by-week/1-to-12/1-2-3-weeks/ (Accessed September 2025)

NHS (2023). Signs and symptoms of pregnancy . Available at https://www.nhs.uk/pregnancy/trying-for-a-baby/signs-and-symptoms-of-pregnancy/ (Page last reviewed: 9 March 2023. Next review due: 9 March 2023) (Accessed September 2025)

NICE (2025) Nausea/vomiting in pregnancy . NICE Clinical Knowledge Summary. National Institute for health and care excellence Available at https://cks.nice.org.uk/topics/nausea-vomiting-in-pregnancy/ (Page last reviewed: July 2025) (Accessed September 2025)

NHS (nd). You and your baby at 15 weeks pregnant . Available at https://www.nhs.uk/pregnancy/week-by-week/13-to-27/15-weeks/ (Accessed September 2025)

NHS (2024). Common health problems in pregnancy . Available at www.nhs.uk/pregnancy/related-conditions/common-symptoms/common-health-problems/ (Page last reviewed: 22 April 2024. Next review due: 22 April 2027) (Accessed September 2025)

NHS Inform (2025). Sex and sexual health in pregnancy . Available at https://www.nhsinform.scot/ready-steady-baby/pregnancy/relationships-and-wellbeing-in-pregnancy/sex-and-sexual-health-in-pregnancy/ (Page last reviewed: 14 August 2025) (Accessed September 2025)

Review dates

Reviewed: 25 January 2026

Next review : 25 January 2029

More support and information

Reaching out to other dads for support during pregnancy and beyond 

Is it serious? Pregnancy symptom checker 

How pregnancy can affect dads and partners 

Getting ready for the birth - for dads, partners and non-birthing parents 

Share on

Share via Facebook

Share via X

Share via WhatsApp

Share via Email

Print

Back to top