Dads and Partners Support in Labour and Birth | Tommy's 

Skip to main content

Getting ready for the birth - for dads, partners and non-birthing parents

Reviewed for clinical accuracy by Kate Marsh , Tommy’s Co-Midwifery Manager and Policy Officer, Health Visitor Lead – Genomics, NHS North Thames Genomic Medicine Service.
Written by Lorna Marsh , Freelance Writer and Editor, Tommy’s. 
Trusted health information certified under the PIF TICK . Last reviewed January 2026. 

On this page 

Planning for the birth 

Supporting your partner before labour 

The health visitor 

During labour and birth (being the birth partner) 

Premature birth 

Supporting your partner 

C-sections 

After your baby is born 

More support and information 

As you get closer to your baby’s due date, you may be wondering what will happen and how you will cope. We have lots of information about what to expect and how to get ready for your baby’s birth. 

Planning for the birth

Everyone’s experience of labour and birth is different, so it can be hard to know what to expect. We have information to help you feel more prepared.

Read about signs that labour is starting and the different stages of labour .

Supporting your partner before labour

You’re likely to feel more confident during labour if you know what your partner’s wishes are. Here are some things you can do to feel more prepared:

write a birth plan together 

pack the hospital bag together

ask your partner what they do or do not want to happen during labour and birth

visit the maternity unit together, if your maternity unit allows visits in advance

go to antenatal classes together.

think about whether you would like to cut the umbilical cord after your baby is born – speak to the midwife in advance if you’d like to do this. 

read more about speaking up for your partner and supporting their decisions before and during labour .

The health visitor 

Your health visitor may offer to come and see you before your baby is born. They will help to make sure you and your partner are feeling ready for your baby’s arrival. For example, they can help you plan where your baby will sleep and explain how you can make sure your home is safe for your baby as they grow. 

Your health visitor is there to support you as well as your partner.

Read more about how your health visitor can help .

During labour and birth (being the birth partner)

When your partner is in labour , you might feel unsure of what to do. All of the focus is on the mum or birthing parent and baby so you may feel like a spare part or unsure of what’s happening. 

Don’t be afraid to ask questions. Knowing what’s happening and why can help you feel more included.

Supporting your partner in labour is not easy. You need to look after yourself too. Make sure you are fed, have drinks and are comfortable and that you know who you can contact for support if you are finding things difficult.

You may feel more in control if you know what is happening, and what might happen next. Learning about the different ways of giving birth , including the medical terms you might hear, can help you feel more prepared and more able offer support when needed.

It’s common for birth partners to feel as if there is not much they can to do help during labour. Just being present and there with them as they go through labour is one of the most important things you can do.

Some female partners and surrogate parents have told us they don’t feel as if they are taken seriously during labour. Others have talked about being shut out of the birth room by hospital staff who do not understand their relationship to the birthing person and their baby. It may help to ask staff beforehand and talk to them about any concerns.

Find out more about ways to support your partner during labour and birth .

Premature birth 

Premature, or preterm, birth is when a baby is born before 37 weeks of pregnancy. We have more information for partners and dads-to-be who want to know more about premature birth . 

As the birth partner, you can make sure your partner’s needs and wishes are met. You may need to make decisions on their behalf if they’re not able to, so it’s important that you know what they do or do not want to happen during and after the birth.

Read more about speaking up for your partner and supporting their decisions before and during labour .

Other ways you can support your partner during labour and birth include: 

being there with them

helping to keep them comfortable – you could help them change position , massage their back and shoulders or give them sips of water

reminding them of breathing and relaxation techniques

supporting their decisions

helping them communicate with the midwife or doctor.

We have lots of information about giving birth , including birth choices , signs of labour and what happens during labour .

C-sections 

Your partner may choose to have a caesarean section (c-section) or they may need an unplanned c-section to deliver the baby safely. Read about how you can support them during and after their c-section .

After your baby is born

Find out more about how to care for your new baby and your role as a new parent .

BBC Tiny Happy People has tips and advice on helping with the birth .

Sources

NHS (2023). Tips for your birth partner . Available at https://www.nhs.uk/pregnancy/labour-and-birth/what-happens/tips-for-your-birth-partner/ (Page last reviewed: 12 May 2023. Next review due: 12 May 2026)(Accessed September2025)

NICE (2021) Postnatal care (NG194) . Available at: https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ng194 (Last reviewed November 2021) (Accessed September 2025). 

NHS (2024) Your body after the birth . Available at: https://www.nhs.uk/pregnancy/labour-and-birth/after-the-birth/your-body/ (Page last reviewed: 25 April 2024; next review due: 25 April 2027). (Accessed September 2025).

NHS (2024) Premature labour and birth . Available at: https://www.nhs.uk/pregnancy/labour-and-birth/signs-of-labour/premature-labour-and-birth/ (Page last reviewed: 10 January 2024; next review due: 10 January 2027). (Accessed September 2025).

NHS (2023) Caesarean section . Available at https://www.nhs.uk/tests-and-treatments/caesarean-section/ (Page last reviewed: 4 January 2023. Next review due: 4 January 2026) (Accessed September 2025)

Find out more about pregnancy for dads and partners

Review dates

Reviewed: 25 January 2026

Next review : 25 January 2029

More support and information

C-section (caesarean) tips for dads and partners 

Symptoms of labour 

Packing your bag for labour and birth 

The stages of labour 

Share on

Share via Facebook

Share via X

Share via WhatsApp

Share via Email

Print

Back to top